It's been suggested that during this period,
while you were at the Hydrographic Office, that
research and development in oceanography was
directed by or divided up, if I may use that word,
between Ewing, Islin, and Revell, that they sort
of are working a plotting, as it were, of expanding
oceanography. Would you agree with that?
You're talking... I'm talking about 46, 47, and
48, when Scripps and Woods Hole and O&R began to
think about what the future of oceanography is.
Yes, I think that's probably a pretty fair
statement. They certainly exerted a lot of
influence in the Washington area.
And
I think it's hard in a way for
me to recall too much what was happening at the
institutions at that time, because I wasn't
there. I wasn't in any of them. I was in Washington.
And I think it was really to kind of stabilize after
the war and get things on what we looked at as more or
less stable footing. In other words, if I can. go
off on a tangent here for a moment. I showed you this
morning this book by Vaughan, which I have called
NASCO I. NASCO is a term that came in later, but this
was one of the early attempts
of the National Academy of Sciences to look at the
state of marine sciences in this country, which
occurred in the 1920s, although that book of bonds
was not published until essentially 10 years
later. But there was another National Academy
committee set up at about the time you're talking
about, and I can't remember it exactly, at which
Scripps, Woods Hole, and so on were asked
essentially what they thought they wanted to do,
and I can't recall any of the content, but there is a
small publication resulting from that
committee, and the only part of it I can recall at
all is that Professor Thompson, who was then
director of what were known as the Oceanographic
Laboratories at the University of Washington,
his chief emphasis that he just wanted to return to
the pre-war status, which I thought was
singularly unimaginative, as I remember. But
yes, I think that It was pretty much dominated by
Woods Hole scripts, and then Lamont came on the
scene, I guess, about that time. And then there was
this flurry of establishment of essentially new
laboratories.
Chesapeake Bay Institute, Texas A&M in
particular come to mind here, and there were
several others as I recall. What sort of fellow was
Islin? What was he like? Well, I think I, although I
was never sort of spent very much time at Woods Hole
and so on, apparently I knew more about him than a
lot of his people that more or less lived with him.
in that he was very much sort of a lone wolf in a way,
although he was quite outgoing in meetings and
conferences and so on, his private life was
something which was very much his own, and he lived
on Martha's Vineyard and later on near Boston, I
think it was in Newton, I'm one of the few people
who's ever been a house guest at the Eastlands, as
far as I know. And I don't know quite why. But
he was a real sort of a puzzle to me, in a way, because
he was
very imaginative in many ways, and very
farsighted in looking ahead and so on. In fact, I
was just thinking the other day that some of the
things he said to me at the time I thought were silly
and which I now look back on and see that he was just
about 10 or 20 years ahead of anybody else and
things. However, I always felt that he was
in a sense anti-intellectual, which sounds kind
of snobbish here, but his own background was only,
I think, up to the level of a bachelor's degree, and
his degree, I think, was actually in
anthropology. In other words, he didn't have a
very strong sort of scientific background on
which to build, and he tended to look for similar
types of people in many cases who were interested,
but I would consider, in a sense, not
scientifically qualified. Now, he made me a liar
in a number of cases here in that some of these
people that he had joined Woods Hole, an
organization that turned out to be very
outstanding, but I would venture that the sort of
general average was not too good. And one of the
great deficiencies I felt at Woods Hole was that
they never sincerely sought, I'm talking of the
era when Islin was there, but it tended to carry on
after he'd retired, was that they never really
supported an educational program either at Woods
Hole or anywhere else. They were very, very much
out of research oriented here. And it was only when
the, I think it was Admiral Smith in particular,
later on saw certain advantages which could be
achieved in terms of money by becoming an
educational institution. They sort of switched
in that direction, but I don't think they've ever
really taken it very seriously. That's my sort of
point here.
I asked Columbus one day, how do you recruit your
people? And he said, oh, I don't worry about that. I
have enough nice young men come knocking on my
door. I never have to go looking for people.
And I think this was true in many cases. They were
nice young men, in the best sense of the word. What
about Yuli? Oh, Ewing is an entrepreneur,
obviously, and very aggressive, very different,
and entirely different from Islin, with a very
tremendously hard working, and
broadly interested, and
very much the entrepreneur, as I said, capable of
interesting people, raising money, getting
things going, and so on. I think with a good eye in
most cases for people that he hired to work with
him, the main
sort of reservation I have about Ewing, as I used to
identify him, he was a cream skimmer. He'd get an
idea, do enough work on it to sort of meet his
particular interest at the moment, sometimes
correctly, sometimes I think misinterpreting
things, and then he'd move on to something else and
leave it to other people to kind of come along and
clean up sometimes the mess I think he left behind
him in the sense. But I think we can, in a field such
as this, we can always, I'm sure, consider
ourselves fortunate to have some people like
that. We don't want everybody to be Morris Ewing.
That same charge has been leveled against Revell.
Would you agree with that? Well, Ravel has
switched around a great deal, and
yet I think, again, it's hard to make offhand. kind
of judgments and evaluations, but his interests
were clearly much broader than Ewing's, and I
think it's fair to say that Ravel had, in a sense, an
altruistic interest in many of these things,
although they redounded to his glory in a way, but I
think Ewing's concerns were always, as things
affected Ewing, and I can't imagine Ewing getting
involved in these programs in India and so on.
Pakistan has rebelled it, or Ewing going
to Harvard has rebelled it and entering an
entirely new sort of field here. And so there's
really some very major differences, I think,
between them.
It's almost as if in let's say about 48 or 49, right
before you decide to come to Washington, it's
almost as if the ONR says, look, there's not enough
oceanographers to suit the needs. And what we've
got to do is move out and not only establish
departments of oceanography, but establish
particular kinds of departments of
oceanography. We need, for example, chemical
oceanographers. Where should that be, and what
should it be? We need people to work on the Gulf
Coast, and what should they do, and what should
they be? Would you agree with that? Yes, I think I
haven't thought about these things for so long,
and dates and events and so on are getting
confused, but there was this
sort of regionalism, yes, that we ought to spot.
places in appropriate coastal regions, and there
was nothing in the Gulf area, Gulf of Mexico, and so
on. And then this Chesapeake Bay development came
up, which was really, I think, possibly brought
into being as much as anything else, but the fact
that ONR was willing to put some money into it,
although it was, as I recall, sort of a tripartite
arrangement at first of Maryland, Virginia, and
ONR. And that was thought of as a center for sort of
looking at large bays and estuaries. And so it was
partly regional, partly sort of subject matter. I
don't really recall any
strong impetus really towards sort of training
programs, although they obviously came along
with this in a way. ONR is always in the rather
difficult position that they were not supposed to
support education as such, and so it was often
done, but it was budgeted for in essentially other
terms here.
They certainly wanted to help here, and the
Dr. Thompson was the director of what were then
known as the Oceanographic Laboratories, which
had existed since about 1930 when the Rockefeller
money was available and the laboratories were set
up, and there was some teaching prior to the war,
some local sort of work at sea with a very small
vessel which was actually sold by the university
during the war, so there was no vessel left here.
When Dr. Thompson came back to the university
after the war, he had a commission in the chemical
warfare branch of the Army. He tried to pick up the
pieces and sort of reestablish a program here and
found it very difficult because a lot of the people
had moved away or died or got other interests.
There was no vessel here and so on. So he was really
faced with a real problem and the first thing that
essentially ONR did here was provide a little
money to essentially to get a small vessel going
again and to support a few people and,
you know, as I indicated a while ago, kind of get it
going a little bit as it had been ten years
previously, and so when I came out here, ONR
support was about $100,000 a year, and that was
essentially the only support available, and it
was available on a, it was really a kind of block
funding, and it was out of this we began to develop
the programs here. So, Yes, I think it was a
deliberate effort of ONR to try and proliferate.
But I think in many cases, if the availability
of funds for some of these newer institutions and
trying to get the University of Washington back in
business again, was essentially as long as it
didn't interfere too much with the funding of
Scripps and Woods Hole, which may sound like sour
grapes, but I think that in a way this was a sort of
situation. Who made contact with you to come out
here? I don't know exactly what happened, but the
man on the faculty or in the administration here
who contacted me was the dean of the College of Arts
and Sciences, Dean Lloyd Woodburn. And
I don't know whether I'd been suggested by Tommy
Thompson or just have,
They had realized, and I think this is sort of worth
noting, that they couldn't go back to the kind of
pre-war operations, that something had to be done
here that would change the thing. And in the spring
of 1951, the Board of Regents, which is our
governing body, decided, I'm sure it was on the
recommendation of Dean Woodburn, to create a
Department of Oceanography in the College of Arts
and Sciences, which then just changed the
emphasis away from a sort of a research activity
towards an educational activity and made it an
undergraduate as well as graduate education.
There were two sort of separate entities here at
the university which had been operated before the
war and had returned to this sort of situation
after the war.
Both of them operated under this general title of
the Oceanographic Laboratories, plural. One was
a facility at the Friday Harbor on the San Juan
Islands, which is a field station type thing, and
the building that had been erected on the main
campus here, which, with Rockville money, which
you have to go and have a look at while you're here.
It's hidden by this other edifice here now. These
two things were operated jointly. under
Professor Thompson, and when I came out here, the
assumption was that I would operate both of them,
but for a variety of reasons, it seemed much better
to me to operate them separately, but I was not
only, I was called executive officer of the
Department of Oceanography and director of the
Friday Harbor Laboratories, and I had these two
jobs in effect for some seven years, I think it was,
and then someone else took over as director at the
Friday Harbor Laboratories, but I had the dual
sort of jobs here. mentioned earlier, I got into
sort of administration of one kind during the war,
administration of kind of another kind in
Washington. I came out here and I got into still
another kind of administration. So in many
respects, I haven't been a research scientist for
a long, long time here. And it was more by accident
than I think by choice. When you came to the West to
visit the dean, what did he tell you about the
Department of Oceanography he wanted you to
found? Oh, I think that
I had fairly
strong ideas at that time about what I thought I
wanted to do, and part of it had come out of some
deliberations that had gone on, and I can't really
remember at the moment who prompted them, whether
it was ONR or some other agency. We'd had a number of
meetings on essentially education in
oceanography, and there was a paper was finally
published, and I think it was in Science, if I
remember correctly, by Redfield and I think
Revell and several others, sort of setting out
what they felt the curriculum in oceanography
ought to be. And this was part of what I sort of had in
mind when I came out here. In other words, I wasn't
operating entirely on my own hunches here. There
was some agreement in a sense as to what might be
done now that what was different here was the
opportunity to get into the undergraduate
program and this it took us about a year I think to
develop a sort of program of courses and so forth
that we thought we could start with. And
we had our first students, I guess, in about 1952.
Now, this
is in effect now the first institution of
undergraduate oceanography in the country, and
possibly in the world. So what sort of students did
you look for?
Well, I don't know whether we looked for a
particular kind of students, because students
kind of come to you in a case like this. What we felt,
and I think correctly, was that we were offering
them a sort of an interesting field. But more
particularly, an opportunity for students.
obviously is science-oriented, and in a sense
here, basically science-oriented, a basic
science orientation.
A field where the student could be a kind of a
scientific generalist rather than a specialist.
And I've always felt that way and I feel it even more
so today that I'm not saying it's the kind of
program that should be available for for
everybody, or it really shouldn't displace the
kind of specialist programs. But I think there
should be opportunities at all levels for
students who have an inclination towards being
broad and being generalists,
interdisciplinary, and these various other
terms that are used. There should be some
opportunities for that. And this is essentially
what we started out with this in mind. The other
sort of things we had in mind was to prepare people
really for jobs in agencies such as hydrographic
office and other government and state agencies
who needed people. The other institutions at that
time were all post-graduate, and really all they
were interested in were doctoral people, so they
were training all the generals, but they didn't
have any Indians to go along with them, and I felt
that, not very glamorous, but certainly a need
that I thought we could meet, and I think we did
fairly well. The original sort of concept was that
all the students would go through a similar sort of
curriculum, but this only lasted for a relatively
few years, and then we began increasing in
numbers, and the research program increased, and
there were more faculty, and so forth, and I found I
was essentially fighting a losing battle here,
because all of the the options, as we used to call
them in the department, physical, chemical,
biological, geological, and somewhat more
recently geophysical, all wanted to have their
own sort of programs. So this idea of a kind of a
basic common undergraduate preparation gave way
to again, more specialized optional programs in
these sort of five fields. And I got sort of out of
sorts with this as the years went by. I think
there's a swing in the other direction now, and
they're beginning to feel that maybe there is some
merit to having people with sort of broad training
again. But it's taken 20 years or so for the
pendulum to swing, and it hasn't moved very far.
that direction. When you started choosing
faculty, what sort of faculty did you look for?
Well, this is more or less, you know, kind of
parallel to the students. There was no one to look
for, and
we had
When I came out here, Professor Thompson, who was a
chemist and a chemical oceanographer, Cliff
Barnes, who was originally a chemist but more so a
physical oceanographer, Morris Rattray, who had
come in just finishing his PhD from Caltech, who
was a theoretical hydrodynamicist, and myself. I
think that was about it. We had really nobody in the
geological area, nobody in the biological area,
and so part of my job was to obviously try and find
some people in these two sort of fields. And it
turned out to be just as hard as it had been during
the war and back in the Hydrographic Office to find
anybody to go into these areas. And
the first geological oceanographer I was able to
add to the faculty was Howard Gould, who's now and
has been for a number of years with the Humboldt
research laboratories in Houston. That's right.
And he spent several years with us and then felt he
wanted more money and so on, so he went to Humble.
And the next geologist I recruited was Joe Krager,
who was a brand new PhD out of Texas A&M. He was one of
the very first of the PhDs. But these people had
very little sort of experience themselves. I
mean, they were, as the most recent PhDs, and they
had to, in a sense, learn a lot on the job here. Not as
far as this sort of research, I'm not saying that,
but from a teaching point of view, the biologist
turned out to be almost equally hard to find
anybody who had, who was not strictly a sort of a
biologist, but had some of the interests of what I
would identify as a biological oceanographer,
which meant some other background. And
this turned out to be, as I say, just as hard to find
anybody there. And this has more or less
persisted, I think, even up to today. One of the
things that strikes me all the time is that you can
clearly find research people these days, often,
however, with really very narrow kind of
preparation, but very few of them with any kind of
teaching experience. may be one of our
contributions here has been the fact that an awful
lot of graduate students have been teaching
assistants here, a kind of experience they never
got in any of the other places, and do go out of here,
not all of them, but a good many of them, with some
kind of feeling about what the teaching job is. How
are you doing?